---
title: Cai & Pleskac (2023)
subtitle: 'When alternative hypotheses shape your beliefs: Context effects in probability judgments'
date: 2023/02/01
authors:
- Cai, Xiaohong
- Pleskac, Timothy J
journal: Cognition
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2022.105306
data_url: https://osf.io/3h7v4
tags:
- 
---

When people are asked to estimate the probability of an event occurring, they sometimes make different subjective probability judgments for different descriptions of the same event. This implies the evidence or support recruited to make these judgments is based on the descriptions of the events (hypotheses) instead of the events themselves, as captured by Tversky and Koehler's (1994) support theory. Support theory, however, assumes each hypothesis elicits a fixed level of support (support invariance). Here, across three studies, we tested this support invariance assumption by asking participants to estimate the probability that an event would occur given a set of relevant statistics. We show that the support recruited about a target hypothesis can depend on the other hypotheses under consideration. Results reveal that for a pair of competing hypotheses, one hypothesis (the target hypothesis) appears more competitive relative to the other when a dud-a hypothesis dominated by the target hypothesis-is present. We also find that the target hypothesis can appear less competitive relative to the other when a resembler-a hypothesis that is similar to the target hypothesis-is present. These context effects invalidate the support invariance assumption in support theory and suggest that a similar process that drives preference construction may also underlie belief construction.
