---
title: Park et al. (2023)
subtitle: 'Parsing patterns of reward responsiveness: Initial evidence from latent profile analysis'
date: 2023/10/01
authors:
- Park, Juhyun
- Banica, Iulia
- Weinberg, Anna
journal: Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci.
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-023-01110-7
data_url: https://osf.io/gvhnp
tags:
- 
---

Variation in reward responsiveness has been linked to psychopathology. Reward responsiveness is a complex phenomenon that encompasses different temporal dimensions (i.e., reward anticipation or consumption) that can be measured using multiple appetitive stimuli. Furthermore, distinct measures, such as neural and self-report measures, reflect related but distinct aspects of reward responsiveness. To understand reward responsiveness more comprehensively and better identify deficits in reward responsiveness implicated in psychopathology, we examined ways multiple measures of reward responsiveness jointly contribute to distinct psychological problems by using latent profile analysis. Specifically, we identified three profiles of reward responsiveness among 139 female participants based on their neural responses to money, food, social acceptance, and erotic images and self-reported responsiveness to reward anticipation and consumption. Profile 1 (n = 30) exhibited blunted neural responses to social rewards and erotic images, low self-reported reward responsiveness, but average neural responses to monetary and food rewards. Profile 2 (n = 71) showed elevated neural response to monetary rewards, average neural responses to other stimuli, and average self-reported reward responsiveness. Profile 3 (n = 38) showed more variable neural responses to reward (e.g., hypersensitivity to erotic images, hyposensitivity to monetary rewards), and high self-reported reward responsiveness. These profiles were differentially associated with variables generally linked to aberrations in reward responsiveness. For example, Profile 1 was most strongly associated with anhedonic depression and social dysfunction, whereas Profile 3 was associated with risk-taking behaviors. These preliminary findings may help to elucidate ways different measures of reward responsiveness manifest within and across individuals and identify specific vulnerabilities for distinct psychological problems.
