---
title: Ruiz et al. (2023)
subtitle: 'Agency as a bridge to form associative memories'
date: 2023/06/01
authors:
- Ruiz, Nicholas A
- DuBrow, Sarah
- Murty, Vishnu P
journal: J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0001356
data_url: https://osf.io/ek53n/
tags:
- 
---

The perception of agency can influence memory when individuals feel their decisions exert control over their environment. While perceived agency has been shown to increase memory for items, most real-life situations are much more complex. Here, we examined how an individual's agency to influence the outcome of a situation affects their ability to learn associations between items that occur prior to and after a decision is made. In our paradigm, participants were told they were playing a game show where they had to help a trial unique cue, a "contestant," choose between three doors. On "agency" trials, participants were allowed to pick any door they wanted. On "forced-choice" trials, participants were instructed to select a door that was highlighted. They then saw the outcome, a "prize" that was behind the selected door. Across multiple studies, we find evidence for agency-related memory enhancements for contestants, a pattern that extended to contestant-prize, contestant-door, and door-prize associations. Additionally, we found that agency benefits for inferred cue-outcome relationships (i.e., door-prize) were limited to situations when choices were motivated by an explicit goal. Finally, we found that agency acts indirectly to influence cue-outcome binding by enhancing processes akin to inferential reasoning which associate information across item pairs containing overlapping information. Together, these data suggest having agency over a situation leads to enhanced memory for all items in that situation. This enhanced binding for items may be occurring by the formation of causal links when an individual has agency over their learning environment. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2023 APA, all rights reserved).
