---
title: Yu et al. (2023)
subtitle: 'Task-adaptive changes to the target template in response to distractor context: Separability versus similarity'
date: 2023/11/02
authors:
- Yu, Xinger
- Rahim, Raisa A
- Geng, Joy J
journal: J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0001507
data_url: https://osf.io/tkgj6
tags:
- 
---

Theories of attention hypothesize the existence of an attentional template that contains target features in working or long-term memory. It is frequently assumed that the template contains a veridical copy of the target, but recent studies suggest that this is not true when the distractors are linearly separable from the target. In such cases, target representations shift "off-veridical" in response to the distractor context, presumably because doing so is adaptive and increases the representational distinctiveness of targets from distractors. However, some have argued that the shifts may be entirely explained by perceptual biases created by simultaneous color contrast. Here we address this debate and test the more general hypothesis that the target template is adaptively shaped by elements of the distractor context needed to distinguish targets from distractors. We used a two-dimensional target and separately manipulated the linear separability of one dimension (color) and the visual similarity of the other (orientation). We found that target shifting along the linearly separable color dimension was dependent on the similarity of targets-to-distractors along the other dimension. The target representations were consistent with a postexperiment strategy questionnaire in which participants reported using color more when orientation was hard to use, and orientation more when it was easier to use. We conclude that the target template is task-adaptive and exploit features in the distractor context that most predictably distinguish targets from distractors to increase visual search efficiency. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2023 APA, all rights reserved).
